People are arrested for things they say
on Facebook, on Twitter. Like in the US,
it seems new to you, but we have been
living with this and is increasingly
becoming normalized.
[Music]
Writer
Aaron Dati Roy sees disturbing parallels
between what's happening in the United
States and what she's experienced in her
native India, where censorship
campaigns, book banning, and other
assaults on freedom of expression are
becoming more common. Royy's debut
novel, The God of Small Things, made her
a global literary star in 1997. She won
the Booker Prize and was interviewed
around the world. The advantage that I
have in my book is that it offends
everybody a little bit.
>> Afterward though, she turned to
non-fiction and activism. It's work that
has put her personally at risk. Royce
spent a day in jail in 2002 for contempt
after criticizing India's Supreme Court.
And more recently, she's been targeted
by India's current government under the
populist leader Narendra Modi. Royy's
latest book is a memoir called Mother
Mary Comes to Me. And in part, it's an
explanation of how she became a
political writer, but it's also a deeply
felt exploration of her relationship
with her very complicated mother. Here's
my conversation with Aaron Datiroy.
[Music]
>> Hi.
>> Hi, Lulu. How are you?
>> I'm very well. Um, thank you so much for
coming on to the interview. I'm very
pleased to have you.
>> Thank you.
>> This book really resonated with me. It's
a memoir of you, but also a biography of
your mother who died in 2022 at the age
of 89. And she was a very complicated
and and difficult person as you describe
her. While I was reading it, it reminded
me of this quote by the writer Cheslav
Milos who wrote, "When a writer is born
into the family, the family is
finished."
Did you struggle with how much to reveal
about your mother and your family just
in the personal context of how difficult
your upbringing actually was?
Uh
well obviously you know when you write
something like this you you you choose
what you write and what you won't write.
But I know that this doesn't work as
literature. If you're trying to present
some uh acceptable version of yourself
or of of her, then you might as well not
do it, you know. But but to me it wasn't
so much of a struggle because I think
what was incredible about her was that
there was there was a part of her which
which which hammered me but then it also
created me but then there was this
public part of her which was so
extraordinary you know so I could never
settle on what I really thought or felt.
I could never remove myself from her
because I admired her too. And I just
felt that this the the the entire range
of what she had was a challenge to me as
a writer. Can I put down this
unresolvable character?
>> Well, let's talk about Mary Roy and and
that public part of her before we get to
to the part of her as your mother. I
mean on the most basic level tell me
about who she was outside of your
relationship. I mean she was indeed a
well-known person.
>> She belonged to the Syrian Christian
community in Kerala which is pretty
privileged tiny but privileged community
that's insulated from the the wildness
and the poverty of the rest of India for
many reasons. But then she married
outside the community and then got
divorced which was absolute taboo you
know and she um started a small school
initially uh in the rented premises of
what was called the Rotary Club. I used
to think of it as a sliding folding
school because we uh uh you know we had
to sweep up all the stubs on the coffee
cups of the men and put out our
furniture and then and then they would
come the next day and mess it up again.
Um and then ultimately built this
beautiful school which still runs. I
studied there too in the early years.
But what she's equally well known for is
that um when she left her husband, my
father, we lived in this tiny little
cottage that used to belong to her very
cruel father who was dead by then. And
then her mother and her older brother
came there and they asked us to leave
the house and they said that as a
daughter according to the Trabuncore
Christian Succession act a daughter can
inherit quarter of her father's property
or 5,000 rupees whichever is less. So we
were literally going to be turfed out
onto this road in the middle of the
night by my grandmother and my uncle and
she and we ran to the lawyer and he told
us that law applies in Kerala not in
Tamilad. So we weren't kicked out but
she nurtured this humiliation and kept
it to herself for a long time. But when
she was able to, when she was
economically stable, when she could
afford to, she filed appeal to the
Supreme Court challenging this law,
calling it unconstitutional. And the
Supreme Court actually
uh struck down that law with
retrospective effect and uh made it
equal inheritance for everybody. And it
took years and years and years in court,
you know, before she actually won the
case. and she had very few people on her
side while she was fighting it.
>> So, there's that side of your mother.
Um,
you start the book though really
discussing
how you were raised by her and
your early life as you describe it was
one of hardship, poverty, instability,
and abuse both verbal and physical. I
should ask before we continue, is
abusive actually the word that feels
right to you in describing your
relationship to her?
>> Uh I I flinch, you know, when when we
use these words because nowadays there
are a lot of these words that are used
and I suppose they are useful in some
ways, but I don't know. I I I didn't use
any of these words in the book. And
>> if it was a single thing that one was
dealing with, you know, if it was just
abuse or just violence or just one thing
that you could settle on and decide how
to feel about it,
that's one thing. But I I think I had a
schism in me very early where even as a
young child I could see that her anger
against me and my brother was somehow
connected to what she herself was going
through. So one half of me was
uh you know was taking the hits and the
other half of me was taking notes and
somehow that
in a sense made me a writer very early
where you're trying to understand why is
she doing this to me? uh you know it it
it was so often clear that it had
nothing to do with what I had said or
what I had done. It had something to do
with something that I couldn't fully
understand or control and was always
struggling to understand and control.
>> I just want to give the audience just a
sense of of some of these incidents that
you describe in the book. Some of the
moments that were hardest to read about
were when she would berate you, belittle
you. You tell a story about being on a
plane for the first time when you were
about 6 years old. Can you recount that
story?
>> Uh yeah. Well, my mother had an older
sister who who was very different from
the rest of the family cuz she was the
only one who had held her marriage
together and she was married to someone
who was a pilot who worked in Indian
Airlines and she had a as I say a proper
house and a proper husband and proper
children and because this this uncle of
mine was a pilot, we we had free tickets
to get on a plane which we had never
been on. And um
on the plane I uh asked my mother how
come uh her sister was so much thinner
than her. And my mother was a very very
severe asthmatic and she was at the time
you on steroids and she had just become
very overweight and she had this moon
face and she just uh turned on me in a
fury and mimicked me, you know. She had
this way of mimicking my baby way of
speaking and that used to just rip
through me, you know, and and and then
she said, "By the time you're my age,
you'll be three times my size." And of
course, uh, very quickly she
she said, "Well, I'm your mother and
your father, and I' I love you double,
you know, so you forgive her, and yet
you're shredded also." And so that that
was the constant thing that you had to
manage that something would tear you up
and then stitch you back together then
tear you up then stitch you back
together and um yeah
>> that leaves a lot of scars.
>> Well it does but maybe it also made me
the writer that I am. You know,
>> you write that her mimicking you and
calling you names made you feel that I
swirled like water down a drain and
disappeared.
And I think that anyone who's had a
difficult parent, which I have, um, can
identify with that line. Did you think
that you had to hide yourself disappear
when she was attacking you?
>> Um, yeah. Well, it's not only that. She
was the only parent. She was also the
only person in a society and in a family
that makes it clear that you're not part
of it. So, so she's all you have. I
mean, there are no relatives, there are
no neighbors, there's just nobody, you
know. So for me in some ways I've welded
myself to her you know when I was very
young and then
exploded apart when I was older but you
know she had this these terrible attacks
of asthma and she used to keep telling
me I'm going to die and you better
figure out what you're going to do.
You'll live on the street who's going to
look after you. And so I became like her
lung, you know. I was I used to breathe
for her. I was like a extension.
My body was an extension of her body.
And then when I was 16 and I went to
architecture school and I just walked
into those lawns and watched all the
students and I knew that I would I would
be fine. I would be able to work. I
would be able to survive. I wouldn't die
if she died. I didn't have to breathe
for her. And she sensed that the valiant
organ child of hers, the the lung, extra
lung that she had suddenly was breathing
for itself and that generated a whole
lot of hostility.
>> I just want to clarify that you ended up
leaving your home at 16. Um there was a
huge period of separation where you
didn't see your mother at all and you
basically raised yourself.
>> Yeah. I I I I left uh Kerala to join
architecture school when I was 16 and
after my second year I just stopped
going home because it was too painful
you know. So I I put myself through the
rest of it.
>> College.
>> We should say that. Sorry, I just keep
wanting to say that I I don't want this
to end up like some litany of uh you
know horrors about her because as I keep
saying in the book I I had huge
admiration for her too.
>> I mean you talk about the battles that
she was fighting even within the school
how she taught women and the men to look
at gender dynamics in a completely
different way. I mean, you tell a story
about her, you know, making the boys
parade around in bras because one of
them had disrespected one of the girls.
Um,
>> not parade around, not parade around in
bras, but
>> something similar.
>> No, she just learned that um they were
making fun of the girls because they had
started wearing bras. So, she said, "Go
to my cupboard and get my bra." And then
she showed them. She said, "This is a
bra. This is what it's for in assembly,
you She said, "If it excites you so
much, you can keep mine."
>> So, it it changes the pH balance of what
goes on between boys and girls. You
know, when the girls know that there's
someone who's got their back.
>> One of the most interesting things uh in
the book is how you write about gender
dynamics. Um, which we should say you
have always written about, but in the
book you describe India as the land of
sun worshippers. That's Sen. But you
also describe how harsh
your mother was with your brother in
particular. I mean, she would call him a
male chauvinist pig when he was only a
child. When he was a teenager, she said
to him, you know, you're ugly and
stupid.
You know, you should kill yourself.
You write that the way she treated him
was like she was punishing him for the
sins of the world and that that
complicated your own views of feminism.
And I'm wondering how that played out
for you.
>> Well, I I mean, even today, I think that
my brother, he's one of the most amazing
people that I know, you know, and having
endured all that from her. My My
brother's the one that asks me, I don't
understand how you can be so
so upset about her death after
everything that she did to us, you know.
and and I understand that uh it's very
puzzling for him and perhaps even
hurtful that I uh I don't hate her, you
know, but uh I think it's just because I
see that her public battles were making
space for women in ways that included
making space for me. But at the same
time, just because you're a feminist
doesn't make you a great person. You
know, I it feminism just doesn't have
only to do with women's rights. It has
to do with a way of looking at the world
in which men and women are equal and men
and women are respectful of each each
other. It doesn't mean disrespecting
uh a lovely man. it doesn't mean that
which is what I saw happening with my
brother and it it affected me deeply.
I I want to just linger here for a
moment because I am curious because you
you and your brother saw your mother so
differently what the conversations
around this book have been. I mean has
he read it and what has he thought of
it?
Yeah, I mean he he has read it and uh I
think it was hard initially for him to
read because he
uh in a way has
or maybe thought he had put it behind
him but uh then he
uh wrote to me saying I'm laughing and
crying and I can't breathe and if I die
it'll be your fault and then then uh but
then he did say you know uh I don't
understand why you uh why you you know
feel so much about her cuz I said I
can't hate her because there are so much
of her in me I'd have to hate myself but
you know I see that he's been
and I respect that he's been deeply
deeply hurt by her
>> but he too he too has made his life on
his own and brilliantly so you M
>> both of us survived.
>> There is this other moment that really
struck me in the book where you describe
you and your brother being sent to
boarding school and you write that your
brother got a report from school that
said average student and your mother
beat him with a ruler until it broke.
And in the morning she then turned to
you and gave you a hug because your
report card had been good and said that
you were brilliant. And you wrote, "On
the occasions when I am toasted or
applauded, I always feel that someone
else, someone quiet is being beaten in
the other room." I have to say that
stopped me in my tracks.
>> Yeah. I think the the the sentence after
that is if you stop to think about it,
it's true. someone is, you know,
>> and and actually that is the truth, you
know, that uh I mean when you get
uh applauded and rewarded and everybody
claps and and and you you know that
somebody you love and somebody quiet has
has been beaten and to me that expands
far beyond my brother and me. It it
expands into the country that I live in
now. you know that or the world that I
live in now that I might be uh a writer
with you know whatever is conventionally
known as success but the things I write
about and the people that I write about
are being beaten they are being beaten
down even as we speak today you know
they are being starved in Gaza they are
being broken they are being occupied and
so what does it mean when you are
applauded when you when your heart
belongs in the whole world.
>> When you
wrote that section and were thinking
about that incident and how it applies
to your life as someone who has been
frequently publicly applauded and given
so many awards,
was it a sense of discovery that this
was the root of that connection?
No, I I I don't think that uh
I mean I don't think that the process of
writing this
made me understand it deeper because I
wrote it because I understood it. you
know,
>> in order to survive or in order to make
sense of my
uh life, I've had to think and think and
think and think and think about all
these things, you know. So uh even for
example when I won the book aer prize
and so on I there was like more than one
half of me that was um
you know
uh thinking about what does it mean to
be this besteller novelist in this
country where people can't read in this
country where you know is hurtling
towards what we have now. So there was
hardly a moment uh for me to to feel
great about myself, you know, before
things started to unravel quickly.
And um even the celebration of me had
this whole nationalistic fervor which I
despised at that time in 97. So, uh, I
was very quickly, um, kicked off that
pedestal and I kicked myself off it,
too. You know, I always have this
feeling that those of us who've been
very unsafe as as children, we seek out
the unsafe. We seek out the lack of
security. And if you have security, you
blow it up. I mean you've
risked your security um many times uh in
your career. Uh we should say that at
the moment actually you are under um
legal threat in India for uh your
writing uh and the things that you've
said. I mean what do you think the role
of writers and creators
is at a moment when there is censorship
and people are trying to shut you down?
I think that writers have survived uh
you know whether it's in the Soviet
Union or whether it's in East Germany or
whether it's in the darkest places and
times they have managed to survive they
ma their work has survived and it's for
me very important to understand that I
just can't keep striking the same note
again and again you have to keep it you
have to change it up you know you have
to vary things. You have to experiment.
You have to insist that your work is not
just a reaction to what's happening to
you. It your work is a thing in and of
itself and uh a a way of thinking, a way
of positing another vision of the world.
And and that's a challenge because you
can't do it as a manifesto as some
clumsy uh you know hitting everybody on
the head with some ideological hammer.
You've got to do it beautifully. And
somebody told me the other day that oh
you know the reason I like uh your
writing is cuz you write as though
they've already killed you. Meaning you
don't have you don't hold back you know
stuff for another book or another essay
or something. Let's just put it all
down.
>> It's your epitap.
to bring this back to your mother. One
of the things that I was most curious
about is once you had this immense
success um and the pressures that it
brought because of your non-fiction
writing um about the situation in
Kashmir about
huge dam operations and many of the
other issues that you have passionately
written about um including the rise of
Hindu nationalism in India.
How did she view that? Was she worried
for you? Was she proud of you? Was she
jealous of you?
>> She um
you know, of all the people that I know
in in in my family, she's the one who
used to read it every every especially
every political essay and she used to
follow it closely.
But she I know that she was worried but
not because she told me she was worried
but because other people in the school
used to tell me she's worried but to me
she was always like
what what the hell do you think you're
doing and you know whatever very
dismissive but perhaps she also had
these as unresolved feelings about me as
I did for for her because once she
called me up to say that you know I went
to buy some fruit and that woman asked
me are you Arundat Tiroyy's mother and I
felt as though she had slapped me and
she called me to tell me this you know
and and at the same time she was also
proud because I was a I was not just her
daughter I was also product of her
school you know so uh
I think she she had her moments when she
was very very ill she used to get very
upset
uh if I wasn't there in the hospital,
but if I was there, she would say, "Oh,
these people, they're just coming here
because of you. They don't care about
me." And you know that stuff. So,
>> how how did that make you feel um that
she seemed to have a complicated
relationship with you even as you became
an enormous success?
Well, first of all, uh, as we've spoken
before, you know, success was in itself
without her and her opinions a
complicated thing for me. But, uh, you
know, occasionally it used to break my
heart that she had such a thorny,
uh, you know, response to it.
But at the same time, I always was very
clear in my mind that I never wanted to
defeat her. Like I wanted her to go out
like a queen, you know, which she did.
And um you know that involved reducing
myself sometimes. That involved
being mauled and shredded and having to
piece myself together sometimes. That
involved
calibrating how many days I could be
there before I was absolutely
corroded.
It it involved coming home and
being quite sick physically for a long
time just to get over it, you know. But
at the same time, somehow I had that
ability to detach myself and sit on the
ceiling fan and think, "God, this is
quite funny." need the whole thing,
isn't it? You know, so I think that sort
of saved me and also because I
the more I traveled, the more I saw of
the world, the more I wrote about things
that were happening, the less able I was
to put myself at the center of some
great tragedy, you know. I was just
like, it's okay. Things are bad
elsewhere, you know.
>> Well, um, we are going to speak again in
a short time. Um and I want to talk more
about your political writing, your
activism, um and the situation in India
and we'll pick up there. But uh I want
to thank you so much for this
conversation.
>> Thank you. It's my pleasure.
>> Can I ask you one more question
actually?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> Is it hard to talk about this?
>> I'm I'm just learning to talk about it.
I can see your physical self when I ask
certain questions and and it might be
uncomfortable territory I imagine.
>> Yeah. I mean I I I read the audio book
and the audio uh uh engineer producer he
told me uh you know it's okay you can
take some breaks and if you get upset I
said me why would I get upset? I wrote
it. I lived it. You know I'm going to
get upset. He says, "Oh, well, the last
third of the book, your voice is
completely different from this first
twothirds." I I have to see, you know,
how it goes. And um
uh I think to me it's important that
people don't think that this is just a
book about a mother and a daughter
because this is a book about two women
who happen to be mother and daughter,
but it's also about the village and the
city and the state and the country and
the world. And if it weren't that,
uh, it would not be as important to me.
On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, a few days later, I followed
up with Arandati. This time, we spoke
about her political writing.
>> Hi, nice to see you again.
>> Hey, Lulu. Nice to see you, too. you
know after we spoke last time
uh and we talked a little bit about the
political situation in India and the
situation for you in particular just in
the past few days the Indian regional
government of Kashmir has banned one of
your books and of course this is not the
first time your work has been targeted
this time the book is Azadi it was
published in 2020 it's about the fight
in Indian controlled Kashmir the
concepts behind freedom and
authoritarianism ism more broadly. And
I'm going to quote what the directive
said. It said that your book and others
um it wasn't the only one that was
targeted. Uh would quote deeply impact
the psyche of youth by promoting a
culture of grievance, victimhood, and
terrorist heroism.
Why do you think your book was included
in that list? And what's your response
to that more broadly? You know, my
response to it is to not respond because
uh I don't know. It sounds like some
list they got out of chat GPT or
something. So, uh you never know why
these things happen when they happen.
when they target me now, I just um I
just don't say anything because
you never know whether they really mean
it or it's just some
side game to distract from something or
whatever. So, I have no idea. So, I'm
not really going to say much about it.
>> Okay. As we mentioned in our first
conversation, you are currently under
threat of arrest in India uh for
comments you made about Kashmir in 2010.
I mean for our audience, do you feel
comfortable explaining your position and
can you tell me a little bit about the
status of that legal case?
uh I really don't want to talk about it
actually because you know it just uh
increases the risk of you know something
being taken out of context and something
blowing up uh uh it's dormant right now
so I just let it be you know
>> then let me ask you this because even
the manner in which you're responding
which is that you do not want to address
this because of the fear of legal
repercussions that could even mean
jail
and and other other punishments.
What does that say when governments try
and silence authors, writers, academics
regarding their work and regarding what
what they try and put out in the world?
Well, I think um in America, you're
beginning to head in that direction. Uh
ours started a long time ago and one has
to learn how to navigate it. And the
reason that I don't talk about it is
because uh I would much rather
um write what I want to write than have
some controversy about something you
just say off the cuff. It's like they're
always trying to trip people up and
trying to prevent you from thinking
clearly or and and so this culture of
fear is everywhere here you know now
people are not able to uh you know
people are arrested for things they say
on Facebook on Twitter or what they
don't say like in the US it seems new to
you but we have been living with this
and is increasingly becoming normalized
It's a very disturbing situation and
especially disturbing uh you know
obviously for Muslims uh where it
doesn't stop with just uh you know court
cases and jail it goes on to lynching
and murder and social boycotts and
economic boycotts and their homes being
bulldozed.
So you know always one thing leads to
another to another to another and you
end up being in a situation where you
meet people who have stories that you
can't look away from. This thing is
really I think seminal to your work you
know when you have seen injustice you
have not been able to look away. Many
people do look away. What do you think
it is about you that
makes you not flinch?
>> Actually, I think uh uh the the point is
that I do flinch when I see it and most
people don't flinch. You know, they just
accept it as a part of uh you know daily
injustices. And the thing is that India
is a society
um that is built on a social hierarchy
which is amongst the most cruel in the
world. You know, we have a situation
where people uh people are divided up
hierarchically according to what is
considered levels of purity and impurity
and the dehumanization of people who are
considered outcast uh which has been
actually institutionalized.
So it's a society that
accepts injustice as a as a given. you
touched on this a little um and and so I
would love to hear your thoughts on
how you view parallels between
the Hindu nationalist movement in India
and the MAGA movement here in the United
States. There are a lot of parallels. So
one of the first things that happened
was when Modi came to power was
demonetization was this direct hit on
the economy where he suddenly said 500
rupee notes were illegal like overnight.
If you look at the attack on
citizenship, the attack on universities,
the attack on students, the attack on
Rohingyas, the continuous uh
uncertainty, the fact that you might be
ambushed by anything at any time. It's
so similar that you wonder is there a
playbook or is it just osmotic
sort of um authoritarian behavior? And
of course there are other things like
voter suppression. The leader of the
opposition had a huge expose of how
voter lists have been manipulated. So
basically what you're seeing is is that
the ruling party is confused with
government
and all of it is confused with one man
you know. So you you're seeing that in
the US and I look at I look at it in
shock cuz you know you thought that
there was a mechanism in place there
were checks and balances in place but
clearly there isn't a way of handling
someone who's completely out of control.
you you know the way statisticians are
being fired for giving out figures that
don't that the authoritarian doesn't
agree with. Same thing here. You can't
believe any of the government figures on
economics because every everything that
doesn't suit the ruling establishment is
dismissed. It's thrown away and a new
picture is put in its place. The one big
difference between what's happening in
India and what is happening right now in
the US is that in India the mainstream
media has completely compromised. It's
not it's not just rolled over. It is
actually
an organ of the authoritarian state.
It's actually calling for people's
arrest or making up lies. Of course,
America is sitting on top of a crumbling
world. Whatever Trump does affects the
whole world, whereas here it just
affects this country.
>> Why do you think um authoritarian
leaders go after
people like you, people who deal in
ideas when you said there's like an echo
of a playbook? Um I mean, we've seen
that. Yes. in in places all around the
world. I've covered it
>> from time immemorial.
>> Memorial. Exactly.
>> But as someone who's the subject of of
that kind of censure, I'm wondering why
you think it happens.
>> I think uh they are terrified of people
who who they feel like can communicate
not just cerebrally but emotionally and
otherwise with with people, you know. So
people who can uh even however small
they are and even however little access
they have to the mainstream or to the
the thundering pullpit thumping uh
television anchors. They know that there
are some people who
uh who somehow people eventually do
listen to. They know it, you know. They
know who is read, they know who is um
loved, they know also who is not
invested in the things that
uh everyone else is invested in. You
know, it's not just about fame and money
and awards and whatever it is. You know,
there's something else going on. And
there are a lot of people like that who
who they know just will not bow down.
>> I think what you're referring to in part
is
uh people like yourself who also deal
with emotional truth,
>> not just um facts, but being able to
capture ideas that resonate on a
different level. I mean it's really
interesting cuz now you see the
government moving to capture Bollywood
right and one after another after
another they churn out these absolutely
hateful films hateful violent
literally almost evil films but they
just don't work
>> in our first conversation when I asked
you about how you see the role of
artists in turbulent moments you said
something that struck me. Um, you have
to insist that your work is not just a
reaction to what's happening to you. Is
that feeling specific to your fiction?
Because you're, as we've said, a very
prolific political writer,
>> but maybe that work feels different.
>> That work is different because that work
is often an argument that that is made
at a time when things are closing down.
when I see the media, the government,
everybody closing in on a vulnerable
community or or you know trying to lie
about them, pretend that they are what
they are not and so on and and and and
it's really like trying to blow a space
open, you know, that I would go in and
it's always almost all the essays are
written despite despite my telling
myself I'm not going to do it. I'm not
going to do you and because you get into
so much trouble uh after and then when
it just becomes harder to keep quiet
than to write I write and for me it's
not about the product or how many books
I write I I'm not uh interested in that
output being huge you know um I I'm
interested in
living the life of a writer which does
not involve just sitting and writing. It
involves a lot of living, a lot of
listening, a lot of traveling, a lot of
inhabiting worlds and worlds and worlds,
you know, which is why I love this place
because there's so much about it that I
still
don't know.
[Music]